About The Authors
==================

**Larry Peterson** is the Robert E. Kahn Professor of Computer
Science, Emeritus at Princeton University, where he served as Chair
from 2003-2009. His research focuses on the design, implementation,
and operation of Internet-scale distributed systems, including the
widely used PlanetLab and MeasurementLab platforms.  He is currently
contributing to the Aether access-edge cloud project at the Linux
Foundation.  Peterson is a member of the National Academy of
Engineering, a Fellow of the ACM and the IEEE, the 2010 recipient of
the IEEE Kobayashi Computer and Communication Award, and the 2013
recipient of the ACM SIGCOMM Award. He received his Ph.D. degree from
Purdue University.

**Scott Baker** is a Cloud Software Architect at Intel, where he works
on the Open Edge Platform. Prior to joining Intel, he was on the Open
Networking Foundation (ONF) engineering team that built Aether,
leading the runtime control effort. Baker has also worked on
cloud-related research projects at Princeton and the University of
Arizona, including PlanetLab, GENI, and VICCI. He received his
Ph.D. in Computer Science from the University of Arizona in 2005.

**Andy Bavier** is a Cloud Software Engineer at Intel, where he works
on the Open Edge Platform. Prior to joining Intel, he was on the Open
Networking Foundation (ONF) engineering team that built Aether,
leading the observability effort. Bavier has also been a Research
Scientist at Princeton University, where he worked on the PlanetLab
project. He received a BA in Philosophy from William & Mary in 1990,
an MS in Computer Science from the University of Arizona in 1995, and
a PhD in Computer Science from Princeton University in 2004.

**Zack Williams** is a Cloud Software Engineer at Intel, where he
works on the Open Edge Platform. Prior to joining Intel, he was on the
Open Networking Foundation (ONF) engineering team that built
Aether, leading the infrastructure provisioning effort. Williams has also
been a systems programmer at the University of Arizona. He received
his BS in Computer Science from the University of Arizona in 2001.

**Bruce Davie** is a computer scientist noted for his contributions to
the field of networking. He began his networking career at Bellcore
where he worked on the Aurora Gigabit testbed and collaborated with
Larry Peterson on high-speed host-network interfaces. He then went to
Cisco where he led a team of architects responsible for Multiprotocol
Label Switching (MPLS). He worked extensively at the IETF on
standardizing MPLS and various quality of service technologies. He
also spent five years as a visiting lecturer at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. In 2012 he joined Software Defined Networking
(SDN) startup Nicira and was then a principal engineer at VMware
following the acquisition of Nicira. In 2017 he took on the role of VP
and CTO for the Asia Pacific region at VMware. He is a Fellow of the
ACM and chaired ACM SIGCOMM from 2009 to 2013. Davie is the author of
multiple books and the holder of more than 40 U.S. patents.

